---
title: "Integration of multi-modal datasets to estimate human aging"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2023-10-08-predicting-age-from-human-lung-tissue
excerpt: 'In this work, we explored how different types of biological data can help predict age more accurately. Using data from the GTEx project, we focused on lung and ovary tissues to estimate age based on DNA methylation, gene expression, and histological images. Building on our previous research, we achieved promising results with histological images by using the Hierarchical Image Pyramid Transformers (HIPT) architecture as a feature extractor, significantly boosting prediction accuracy. We also found that combining different omics data improved age prediction across multiple regression metrics. This study demonstrates how deep learning can be applied to better understand aging by integrating various biological data.'
date: 2024-07-29
venue: 'Machine Learning, July 2024, Springer'
paperurl: 'https://link.springer.com/10.1007/s10994-024-06588-x'
citation: 'Ribeiro, R., Moraes, A., Moreno, M., Ferreira, P.G. (2023). "Integration of multi-modal datasets to estimate human aging." <i>Machine Learning, 2024, 1-25</i>. Springer.'

---

Aging involves complex biological processes leading to the decline of living organisms. As population lifespan increases worldwide, the importance of identifying factors underlying healthy aging has become critical. Integration of multi-modal datasets is a powerful approach for the analysis of complex biological systems, with the potential to uncover novel aging biomarkers. In this study, we leveraged publicly available epigenomic, transcriptomic and telomere length data along with histological images from the Genotype-Tissue Expression project to build tissue-specific regression models for age prediction. Using data from two tissues, lung and ovary, we aimed to compare model performance across data modalities, as well as to assess the improvement resulting from integrating multiple data types. Our results demostrate that methylation outperformed the other data modalities, with a mean absolute error of 3.36 and 4.36 in the test sets for lung and ovary, respectively. These models achieved lower error rates when compared with established state-of-the-art tissue-agnostic methylation models, emphasizing the importance of a tissue-specific approach. Additionally, this work has shown how the application of Hierarchical Image Pyramid Transformers for feature extraction significantly enhances age modeling using histological images. Finally, we evaluated the benefits of integrating multiple data modalities into a single model. Combining methylation data with other data modalities only marginally improved performance likely due to the limited number of available samples. Combining gene expression with histological features yielded more accurate age predictions compared with the individual performance of these data types. Given these results, this study shows how machine learning applications can be extended to/in multi-modal aging research. Code used is available at https://github.com/zroger49/multi_modal_age_prediction.
